@node Levels, Puzzles, Adventures, Top
@chapter Levels

When you're in a room, two things really matter : what's there, and what happens there.

When I say @samp{What's there}, I mean : @samp{Where is the entrance}?
@samp{Where is the exit}? @samp{What is this flower pot doing here}
etc...?

When I say @samp{What happens there}, I mean : @samp{Should something
strange occur when I walk on this hole that looks like a trap}? (Note
: the answer is aaaaaarg).

The former is what I call a 'Puzzle', or a puzzle definition.  It's
really static. @samp{There is a door over there} kind of static. Just
things that are there.

The latter is what I call a 'Story', or a puzzle story.
Action happens here. Romance and action and fun and elephants.

A level is the combination of a puzzle and a story.  A level doesn't
have a file of it's own, but rather it depends on two separate files
(that we'll discuss later).

Now, a level is kind of clever. If you say that you want a level
called @samp{level_1}, then it will auto-magically look for the puzzle
part in a file called @file{level_1_puzzle.rb} in the folder
@file{levels}. And if there is a file called
@file{level_1_puzzle_story.rb}, it will consider that this is the
story for this level.

Nothing brilliant. Just conventions.

The downside is that you need to follow those conventions, too. So you
must name you puzzle and story files apropriately.

[TODO : describe how you're actually not that screwed if you don't do
that exactly]

Now, let's see what you should put in those puzzle and story.
